'\" t
.\" ** The above line should force tbl to be a preprocessor **
.\" Man page for x0tigervncserver
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2021 Joachim.Falk@gmx.de
.\" Copyright (C) Constantin Kaplinsky and others.
.\"
.\" You may distribute under the terms of the GNU General Public
.\" License as specified in the file COPYING that comes with the
.\" Debian GNU/Linux distribution.
.\"
.TH x0tigervncserver 1 "Feb 6th, 2021" "TigerVNC 1.11.0" "Virtual Network Computing"
.SH NAME
x0tigervncserver \- start or stop a TigerVNC scraping server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.
.B x0tigervncserver
.RI [ :display# | \fB\-display\fP
.IR :display# ]
.RB [ \-rfbport
.IR rfbport# ]
.RB [ \-localhost
.RI [ yes | no ]]
.RB [ \-SecurityTypes
.IR sec-types ]
.RB [ \-PasswordFile | \-rfbauth
.IR passwd-file ]
.RB [ \-PlainUsers
.IR user-list ]
.RB [ \-PAMService | \-pam_service
.IR service-name ]
.RB [ \-X509Key
.IR cert-key-file ]
.RB [ \-X509Cert
.IR cert-file ]
.RB [ \-fg ]
.RB [ \-useold ]
.RB [ \-verbose ]
.RB [ \-dry-run ]
.RB [ \-Geometry
.IR <width>x<height> [{ + , - } <xoffset> { + , - } <yoffset> ]]
.RI [ "X0tigervnc options..." ]
.
.br
.B x0tigervncserver \-kill
.RI [{ :display# , :* }| "\fB\-display\fP " { :display# , :* }]
.RB [ \-rfbport
.IR rfbport# ]
.RB [ \-dry-run]
.RB [ \-verbose ]
.RB [ \-clean ]
.
.br
.B x0tigervncserver \-list
.RI [{ :display# , :* }| "\fB\-display\fP " { :display# , :* }]
.RB [ \-rfbport
.IR rfbport# ]
.RB [ \-cleanstale ]
.
.br
.B x0tigervncserver -version
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBx0tigervncserver\fP wrapper script is used to start the \fBX0tigervnc\fP
server that makes an X display remotely accessible via VNC (Virtual Network
Computing). Unlike \fBXtigervnc\fP, this server does not create a virtual
display. Instead, it just shares an existing X server (typically, that one
connected to the physical screen). The XDamage extension will be used if the
existing X server supports it. Otherwise, \fBX0tigervnc\fP will fall back to
polling the screen for changes.

As usual, the VNC desktop can be connected to with the \fBxtigervncviewer\fP
VNC viewer or any other VNC viewer. For details, see the
.BR xtigervncviewer (1)
man page or execute "xtigervncviewer \-help".

System defaults for this wrapper script are found in
\fI/etc/tigervnc/vncserver-config-defaults\fP. These defaults can be
overwritten by the user defaults given in \fI~/.vnc/tigervnc.conf\fP (see the
.BR tigervnc.conf (5x)
man page). Next, command-line options overwrite the settings in both tigervnc
configuration files. Finally, options from
\fI/etc/tigervnc/vncserver-config-mandatory\fP have the highest priority
overwriting all previous settings.

\fBWARNING! There is nothing stopping users from constructing their own wrapper
script that calls X0tigervnc directly to bypass any options defined in the
/etc/tigervnc/vncserver-config-mandatory configuration file.\fP
.
.SH OPTIONS
You can get a list of options by giving \fB\-h\fP as an option to
\fBx0tigervncserver\fP. In addition to the options listed below, any
unrecognized options will be passed to \fBX0tigervnc\fP \(en see the
.BR X0tigervnc (1)
man page or "\fBX0tigervnc \-help\fP" for details.
.
.TP
.IR :display# | \fB\-display\fP " " :display#
Specifies the X11 display to be shared by the \fBX0tigervnc\fP server.
.
.TP
.B \-rfbport \fIrfbport#\fP
Specifies the TCP port on which \fBX0tigervnc\fP listens for connections from viewers
(the protocol used in VNC is called RFB \(en "remote framebuffer"). The default
is 5900 plus the display number display#.
.
.TP
.B -localhost\fP [\fIyes\fP|\fIno\fP]
Should the TigerVNC server only listen on localhost for incoming TigerVNC
connections. Useful if you use SSH and want to stop non-SSH connections from
any other hosts. If the option is not specified, then the behavior is as
follows: We will only listen on localhost if the \fIsec-types\fP list does not
contain any \fITLS*\fP or \fIX509*\fP security types or if the list contains at
least one \fI*None\fP security type. Otherwise, we will listen on all network
addresses of the machine.
.
.TP
.B \-SecurityTypes \fIsec-types\fP
Specify which security scheme to use for incoming connections. Valid values
are a comma separated list of \fINone\fP, \fIVncAuth\fP, \fIPlain\fP,
\fITLSNone\fP, \fITLSVnc\fP, \fITLSPlain\fP, \fIX509None\fP, \fIX509Vnc\fP, and
\fIX509Plain\fP. Default is \fIVncAuth\fP if \fB\-localhost\fP is not given
and \fIVncAuth,TLSVnc\fP if \fB\-localhost\fP \fIno\fP is given.
.
.TP
.B \-PasswordFile \fIpasswd-file\fP | \-rfbauth \fIpasswd-file\fP
Specifies the file containing the password used to authenticate viewers for the
security types \fIVncAuth\fP, \fITLSVnc\fP, and \fIX509Vnc\fP. The
\fIpasswd-file\fP is accessed each time a connection comes in, so it can be
changed on the fly via \fBtigervncpasswd\fP(1). The default password file is
\fI~/.vnc/passwd\fP.
.
.TP
.B \-PlainUsers \fIuser-list\fP
A comma separated list of user names that are allowed to authenticate via
any of the \fI*Plain\fP security types (i.e., \fIPlain\fP, \fITLSPlain\fP,
etc.). Specify \fI*\fP to allow any user to authenticate using this security
type. Default is to only allow the user that has started the
\fBx0tigervncserver\fP wrapper script.
.
.TP
\fB\-PAMService \fIservice-name\fP | \fB\-pam_service \fIservice-name\fP
PAM service name to use when authenticating users using any of the \fI*Plain\fP
security types. Default is \fBvnc\fP if /etc/pam.d/vnc is present and
\fBtigervnc\fP otherwise. The tigervnc-common-server package ships the
/etc/pam.d/tigervnc PAM service configuration for use by
\fBx0tigervncserver\fP.
.
.TP
.B \-X509Cert\fP \fIcert-path\fP and\fB \-X509Key\fP \fIkey-path\fP
Path to a X509 certificate in PEM format to be used for all \fIX509\fP based
security types (i.e., \fIX509None\fP, \fIX509Vnc\fP, etc.) as well as its
private key also in PEM format. If the certificate and its key are not provided
via the\fB \-X509Cert\fP and\fB \-X509Key\fP command-line options or their
corresponding configuration parameters in
\fI/etc/tigervnc/vncserver-config-defaults\fP, \fI~/.vnc/tigervnc.conf\fP, or
\fI/etc/tigervnc/vncserver-config-mandatory\fP, then the \fBx0tigervncserver\fP
wrapper script auto generates a self signed certificate. The auto generated
self signed certificates are stored in the files ~/.vnc/\fIhost\fP-SrvCert.pem
and ~/.vnc/\fIhost\fP-SrvKey.pem.
.
.TP
.B \-fg
Runs the \fBX0tigervnc\fP server as a foreground process. Thus, the server can
be aborted with CTRL-C.
.
.TP
.B \-useold
Only start a new TigerVNC server if a VNC server for your account is not
already running on the requested display number \fIdisplay#\fP and RFB port
\fIrfbport#\fP. If no display number is requested, a new TigerVNC server
will only be started if there is no TigerVNC server running under your user
account. In any case, information about the newly started TigerVNC server or
the reused TigerVNC server session will be printed.
.
.TP
.B \-verbose
This will turn on some debug output.
.
.TP
.B \-dry-run
Do not actually do anything, but only perform the checks if the requested
action would be possible. For example, there will be checks performed for the
availability of the requested display number display#.
.
.TP
.IR \fB\-Geometry\fP " " <width>x<height> [{ + , - } <xoffset> { + , - } <yoffset> ]
Specifies the screen area that will be shown to VNC clients, e.g.,
\fI640x480+320+240\fP. The format is \fI<width>x<height>+<xoffset>+<yoffset>\fP,
where `+' signs can be replaced with `-' signs to specify offsets from the
right and/or from the bottom of the screen. Offsets are optional, +0+0 is
assumed by default (top left corner). If the argument is empty, full screen is
shown to VNC clients (this is the default).
.
.TP
.B \-kill [ \fI:{display#,*}\fP | \fB\-display \fI:{display#,*}\fP ] [ \fB\-rfbport \fIrfbport#\fP ]
This kills a TigerVNC server previously started with \fBx0tigervncserver\fP or
\fBtigervncserver\fP. It does this by killing the VNC server process, whose
process ID is stored in the file ~/.vnc/\fIhost\fP:\fIrfbport#\fP.pid. If\fB
:*\fP is given, then \fBx0tigervncserver\fP tries to kill all VNC server
processes with pidfiles in \fI~/.vnc\fP on the local machine. If no display number is
given, then \fBx0tigervncserver\fP tries to kill the VNC server process of the
user on the local machine if only one such process is running and has a pidfile
in \fI~/.vnc\fP.
.
.TP
.B \-clean
If given with\fB \-kill\fP, then the logfile ~/.vnc/\fIhost\fP:\fIrfbport#\fP.log is also removed.
.
.TP
.B \-list [ \fI:{display#,*}\fP | \fB\-display \fI:{display#,*}\fP ] [ \fB\-rfbport \fIrfbport#\fP ]
This lists all running TigerVNC servers previously started with
\fBx0tigervncserver\fP or \fBtigervncserver\fP. Stale entries are marked with
(stale) in the output.
.
.TP
.B \-cleanstale
If given with \fB\-list\fP, then stale entries \(en resulting from missed
cleanups of pidfiles in \fI~/.vnc\fP as well as stale X11 locks and sockets in
/tmp due to \fBXtigervnc\fP or \fBX0tigervnc\fP server crashes \(en are cleaned
up and not shown in the output of \fB-list\fP.
.
.SH FILES
Several TigerVNC-related files are found in the \fI~/.vnc\fP directory:
.TP
.I ~/.vnc/tigervnc.conf
The user configuration file for \fBx0tigervncserver\fP.
.TP
.I ~/.vnc/passwd
The TigerVNC password file for the security types \fIVncAuth\fP, \fITLSVnc\fP,
and \fIX509Vnc\fP.
.TP
.I ~/.vnc/<host>:<rfbport#>.log
The log file for the VNC server.
.TP
.I ~/.vnc/<host>:<rfbport#>.pid
Identifies the VNC server process ID, used by the\fB \-kill\fP option.
.TP
.I ~/.vnc/<host>-SrvCert.pem\fP and \fI<host>-SrvKey.pem
The security types \fIX509None\fP, \fIX509Vnc\fP, and \fIX509Plain\fP need a
certificate and the corresponding private key. If these are not provided via
the \fB\-X509Cert\fP and\fB \-X509Key\fP command-line options or their
corresponding configuration parameters in
\fI/etc/tigervnc/vncserver-config-defaults\fP, \fI~/.vnc/tigervnc.conf\fP, or
\fI/etc/tigervnc/vncserver-config-mandatory\fP, then the \fBx0tigervncserver\fP
wrapper script auto generates a self signed certificate for the
\fB\-X509Cert\fP and\fB \-X509Key\fP options of the VNC server. The auto
generated self signed certificates are stored in the above given two files. If
the user wants their own certificate \(en instead of the on demand auto
generated one \(en they can either specify it via the\fB \-X509Cert\fP and\fB
\-X509Key\fP options to the \fBx0tigervncserver\fP wrapper script or replace
the auto generated files ~/.vnc/\fIhost\fP-SrvCert.pem and
~/.vnc/\fIhost\fP-SrvKey.pem. These files will not be overwritten once
generated by the \fBx0tigervncserver\fP wrapper script.
.PP
Furthermore, there are global configuration files for \fBx0tigervncserver\fP in the \fI/etc/tigervnc\fP directory:
.TP
.I /etc/tigervnc/vncserver-config-defaults
The global configuration file specifying the defaults for \fBx0tigervncserver\fP.
.TP
.I /etc/tigervnc/vncserver-config-mandatory
If this file exists and defines options to be passed to \fBX0tigervnc\fP, they will
override any of the same options defined in a user's \fItigervnc.conf\fP file
or ones given on the command line of this wrapper script. This file offers a
mechanism to establish some basic form of system-wide policy.

\fBWARNING! There is nothing stopping users from constructing their own wrapper
script that calls X0tigervnc directly to bypass any options defined in the
/etc/tigervnc/vncserver-config-mandatory configuration file.\fP
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR tigervnc.conf (5x),
.BR tigervncpasswd (1),
.BR X0tigervnc (1),
.BR xtigervncviewer (1),
.BR tigervncserver (1)
.br
https://www.tigervnc.org/
.
.SH AUTHOR
Joachim Falk, Constantin Kaplinsky and others.

VNC was originally developed by the RealVNC team while at Olivetti
Research Ltd / AT&T Laboratories Cambridge. TightVNC additions were
implemented by Constantin Kaplinsky. Many other people have since
participated in development, testing and support. This manual is part
of the TigerVNC Debian packaging project.
